A Royal home and fortress for over 900 years, Windsor Castle, the largest occupied castle in the world,
remains a working palace today. The Queen uses the Castle both as a private home, where she usually spends the weekend,
and as an official Royal residence at which she undertakes certain formal duties.
Every year The Queen takes up official residence in Windsor Castle for a month over Easter (March-April),
known as Easter Court. During that time The Queen hosts occasional 'dine and sleeps' events for guests,
including politicians and public figures and presides over Investiture ceremonies at Windsor Castle throughout the year.
The Queen is also in residence for a week in June, when she attends the service of the Order of the Garter and the Royal
Ascot race meeting. The Order of the Garter ceremony brings together members of the senior order of chivalry for a service
in St George's Chapel. Beforehand, The Queen gives a lunch for the Knights of the Garter in the Castle's Waterloo Chamber.

Any new Knights of the Garter are invested by The Queen in the Garter Throne Room. On the walls are portraits of monarchs
in their Garter Robes, from George I to the present Queen, whose State portrait by Sir James Gunn was painted in 1954.
Windsor Castle is often used by The Queen to host State Visits from overseas monarchs and presidents. Foreign Heads of
 State enter the Castle in horse-drawn carriages through the George IV Gateway into the quadrangle in the Upper Ward,
  where a military guard of honour is drawn up. The traditional State Banquet is held in St George's Hall (55.5m long and 9m wide),
   with a table seating up to 160 guests. Recent State visits held at Windsor Castle include those of the President of Ireland
   and Mrs Higgins in 2014.

St George's Chapel remains an active centre for worship, with daily services open to all. The Chapel is a Royal Peculiar, that is,
 a chapel which is not subject to a bishop or archbishop but which owes its allegiance directly to the Sovereign. The Chapel,
  together with the remainder of the College of St George (a school for 400 children and St George's House, a consultation centre),
   is governed by the Dean and Canons of Windsor, who, with their officers and staff, are independent of the Royal Household.

Many Royal weddings have been celebrated in St George's Chapel, including Prince Edward and Miss Sophie Rhys-Jones in June 1999.
 In 2005 a service of dedication and prayer was held in the Chapel following the marriage of The Prince of Wales and The Duchess
  of Cornwall. Funerals such as those of Princess Margaret and Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, have also taken place there
  . Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother lies buried in the Chapel with her husband, King George VI, and Princess Margaret,
   her younger daughter.

Various departments of the Royal Household are based at Windsor Castle. The ancient Round Tower houses the Royal Archives
 and the Royal Photograph Collection. The Print Room and Royal Library house precious drawings, prints, manuscripts and books
  in the Royal Collection.
  Those who live and work within the Castle include the titular head of the Castle community, the Constable and Governor of Windsor Castle; the Dean of Windsor, Canons and other staff who run the College of St George; the Military Knights of Windsor; the Superintendent of Windsor Castle and his staff, who are responsible for day-to-day administration; the Housekeeper and her staff; and soldiers who mount a permanent military guard in the Castle.

Windsor Castle is also a busy visitor attraction. Many parts of the Castle are open to the public, including the precincts, the State Apartments, Queen Mary's famous dolls' house, St George's Chapel, and the Albert Memorial Chapel. Changing the Guard takes place regularly in the Castle Precincts. When the Queen is in official residence, the parade provides a colourful spectacle in the quadrangle.

History of Windsor Castle
Over a period of nearly 1,000 years Windsor Castle has been inhabited continuously, and altered and refurbished by successive monarchs. Some were great builders, strengthening the Castle against uprising and rebellion; others, living in more peaceful times, created a palatial Royal residence.

William the Conqueror chose the site, high above the river Thames and on the edge of a Saxon hunting ground. It was a day's march from the Tower of London and intended to guard the western approaches to the capital. The outer walls of today's structure are in the same position as those of the original castle built by William the Conqueror in the 1070s. So too is the central mound supporting the Round Tower and the Upper Ward, where successive monarchs have had their private apartments since the fourteenth century.

In the 1170s Henry II rebuilt - in stone instead of wood - the Round Tower, the outer walls of the Upper and most of the Lower Ward, and the Royal apartments in the Upper Ward.

In the 1360s Edward III, who was born at Windsor, extended the Castle. He created the immense St. George's Hall for the use of the Knights of his newly founded Order of the Garter. Ten British monarchs now lie buried in the chapel: Edward IV, Henry VI, Henry VIII, Charles I, George III, George IV, William IV, Edward VII, George V and George VI.

During the Civil War the Castle was captured by the Parliamentarian Colonel John Venn in 1642 and became the headquarters for various Parliamentarian commanders. From 1643 the Castle was used as a prison and was used as such throughout the Wars.

In 1648 Charles I was held there before his trial and execution in London; his body was brought back for burial in St. George's Chapel during a snowstorm. Oliver Cromwell took over in 1650 and when he was made Lord Protector in 1653 it became one of his official residences.

Following the Restoration, Charles II was determined to make the Castle as splendid as possible. He created a new set of State Apartments in the 1670s, using the skills of the architect Hugh May, the artist Antonio Verrio for murals and ceiling paintings, and the famous wood-carver Grinling Gibbons.

The King's Dining Room and the Queen's Presence and Audience Chambers retain many of these original features. Charles II also laid out the 5km Long Walk leading due south from the Castle into Windsor Great Park.

George IV was a great lover of art and fine decoration. Much of Windsor Castle's present appearance is due to the alterations he instigated in the 1820s with his architect, Sir Jeffry Wyatville. The buildings were refashioned in the Gothic style, with the addition of crenellations, turrets and towers. In the Upper Ward the private apartments were moved from the north side of the quadrangle to the south and east side. The rooms on the north side were designated, as now, as for use on formal occasions and State visits.

One of George IV's most remarkable additions was the Waterloo Chamber, which was created in the 1820s to show portraits commissioned from Sir Thomas Lawrence to commemorate the defeat of Napoleon at the battle of Waterloo in 1815, representing the monarchs, soldiers and statesmen who were involved in that defeat and its aftermath. They include George III, George IV and the future William IV, the Duke of Wellington, Field Marshal von Blücher, the Emperors of Austria and Russia, the Kings of Prussia and France, and Pope Pius VII.

Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were devoted to Windsor, where they spent much of their time. It was during the reign of Queen Victoria that, in 1845, the State Apartments were first opened to the public. Prince Albert died of typhoid at Windsor in 1861 and was buried in a spectacular mausoleum that Queen Victoria constructed at Frogmore in the Windsor Home Park.

During the Second World War, Windsor Castle was home to the young Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret Rose while their parents supported the war effort in London and around the country. Today The Queen still uses the Castle regularly, spending most of her weekends there.
The twentieth-century history of the Castle is dominated by the major fire that started on 20 November 1992. It began in the Private Chapel, when a spotlight came into contact with a curtain and ignited the material. It took 15 hours and one-and-a-half million gallons of water to put out the blaze. Nine principal rooms and over 100 other rooms over an area of 9,000 square metres were damaged or destroyed by the fire, approximately one-fifth of the Castle area.

The next five years were spent restoring Windsor Castle to its former glory. It resulted in the greatest historic building project to have been undertaken in this country in the twentieth century, reviving many traditional crafts.The restoration was completed six months ahead of schedule on 20 November 1997 at a cost of £37 million £3 million below budget. Seventy per cent of the necessary revenue was raised from opening Buckingham Palace's State Rooms to visitors in August and September.

The remaining 30 per cent of the cost was met from savings in the annual Grant-in-Aid funding from Parliament for the maintenance and upkeep of the occupied Royal Palaces. The restoration was undertaken at no additional cost to the taxpayer.

To mark the completion, The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh held a 'thank you' reception in the restored rooms on 14 November 1997 for 1,500 contractors. On 20 November that year they celebrated their Golden Wedding Anniversary with a ball also held at Windsor Castle.

Visiting Windsor Castle
Windsor Castle is open to the public all year round. Find out more about visiting the Castle on the Royal Collection Trust website.

Description
In this well-known picture Queen Victoria is skilfully depicted as both sovereign and mother. The scene is one of domestic harmony, peace and happiness, albeit with many allusions to royal status: grandeur in the form of jewels and furniture, tradition (through the Order of the Garter) and the continuation of the royal lineage. The Prince of Wales, wearing a Russian blouse, stands beside his mother but meets the gaze of his father. Prince Alfred is on the left in the skirted outfit typically worn by young boys up to the age of around three. He walks towards his three sisters – Victoria, Princess Royal on the far right, Princess Alice and the infant Princess Helena. Queen Victoria wears an emerald and diamond diadem designed by Prince Albert in 1845 and made by Joseph Kitching at a cost of £1,150. Matching drop earrings and three brooches attached to her bodice complete the parure. Prince Albert wears court dress, consisting of black velvet breeches, a white satin waistcoat and a black single-breasted dress coat cut fashionably tight on the arms. Both wear their ribbon and star of the Garter, and Prince Albert also wears the Garter itself and the badge of the Golden Fleece.

In May 1846 Queen Victoria wrote to the French king, Louis-Philippe, to ask if he would release Winterhalter from his role as court painter in the autumn so that he could paint a large picture of her family for Osborne. Sittings began at Windsor in October 1846 and continued into January of the following year. When finished the picture was considered by the Queen 'a "chef d'oeuvre", like a Paul Veronese – such beautiful, brilliant, fresh colouring - & we were enchanted' (Journal, 18 December, 1846). The Queen later wrote that this was one of her three favourite portraits of the Prince (RA VIC/ MAIN/ Y/ 169/ 69).

The painting was hung in the Dining Room at Osborne. Although intended ultimately for this private setting, it was first exhibited in 1847 in St James's Palace, where it was seen by 100,000 members of the public. In 1850 it was engraved for public circulation. The throne-like grandeur of the chairs upon which Queen Victoria and Prince Albert sit (made by Morel & Seddon for Windsor Castle in 1828) together with the swathe of red curtain and the landscape background – no doubt intended to suggest the view from Osborne but reminiscent of a theatre backdrop – combine to give the effect of a stage set: a royal family on show to the world. However, some sense of the tension between the royal couple's official and domestic roles arises from the incongruity of the evening costume they wear to play with their young children. In contrast to all previous royal family portraits, such as those by Van Dyck or Zoffany, the figures seem remarkably unposed, and the children (with the exception of the infant Princess Helena) seem oblivious of the viewer. As a result the painting is almost photographic in its capture of an intimate family moment.

Queen Victoria recorded the admiration expressed by Lord Palmerston, the Duchess of Sutherland, the Cambridge family and Sir Robert and Lady Peel, all of whom saw the picture while it was in progress. However it was not so well received by the press who criticised its 'coarse handling' and the 'sensual and fleshy' depiction of the royal couple. The Prince's hands were likened to those of a farmer (Athenaeum, 1847, p.496). The fact that a foreign artist had been chosen for such an important royal commission was also a source of contention (Art Journal, 1850) and even led the critic from the 'Athenaeum' to write that the picture displayed 'such a want of taste – as make us frankly rejoice that it is not from the hand of an Englishman' (1847, p. 496). The engraving – by an Englishman, Samuel Cousins (1801-1887) – met with greater critical success ('the expression in the faces of the Queen and the Prince has far more of the natural benignity belonging to them than the painter had given', Art Journal, 1850). The print was also admired by Queen Victoria, who wrote: 'Cousins has just finished the engraving of the Family picture & it is a splendid one' (Journal, 26 February, 1850).

Text adapted from 'Victoria and Albert: Art & Love', London, 2010
Provenance
Commissioned by Queen Victoria (£1,050)
The Palace of Holyroodhouse today
Today the Palace of Holyroodhouse is used as a Royal Palace, but is also open to the public all year round. It also is a centrepoint for celebrating the best of Scotland.

This is most evident in The Queen’s ‘Holyrood Week’ of engagements, undertaken every year from the end of June to the beginning of July. Her Majesty attends several engagements around the country to celebrate Scottish culture, history and achievement.

The Investiture held in the Great Gallery is for Scottish residents whose achievements have been recognised in the twice-yearly Honours List which appears at New Year and on The Queen's Official Birthday in June.

King George V and Queen Mary held the first garden party in the grounds of Holyroodhouse and the tradition has been maintained to the present day. Each year, The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh entertain around 8,000 guests from all walks of Scottish life during Holyrood week.

History of the Palace of Holyroodhouse
David I founded the Palace of Holyroodhouse as an Augustinian monastery in 1128.  The Abbey prospered. With Edinburgh now recognised as Scotland's capital, her kings chose to live in Holyroodhouse, surrounded by parkland, rather than in the bleak Castle, high on a rock overlooking the town and exposed to the elements.
The Abbey prospered. With Edinburgh now recognised as Scotland's capital, her kings chose to live in Holyroodhouse, surrounded by parkland, rather than in the bleak Castle, high on a rock overlooking the town and exposed to the elements.

In 1501 James IV cleared the ground close to the Abbey and built a Palace for himself and his bride, Margaret Tudor – the sister of Henry VIII. Only a fragment of the gatehouse survives today.  His successor James V added a massive Tower between 1528 and 1532, and a new west front south of the Tower between 1535 and 1536.

Mary, Queen of Scots spent most of her turbulent life in the Palace - a dramatic and often tragic chapter in the history of the building. She married two of her husbands in the palace. Her private secretary David Rizzio was murdered in her private apartments by a group led by her husband Lord Darnley, who was jealous of Rizzio's influence over Mary.

Further renovation was carried out in 1633 to mark the Scottish coronation of James's son Charles I.  During the Civil War Oliver Cromwell's troops were billeted at the Palace.

Charles II was crowned in Scotland in 1651.  Although he never returned there, he initiated a substantial rebuilding of Holyroodhouse in the 1670s and the palace was transformed by the Scottish architect, Sir William Bruce. A tower was added to the right, to form a symmetrical façade, and new Royal Apartments were created in a sequence of richly decorated rooms, with sumptuous plasterwork ceilings, arranged around a classical-style quadrangle’.

In the twentieth century, King George V and Queen Mary continued restoration and renovation work on the Palace, which they regarded as a family home. They were instrumental in bringing Holyroodhouse into the twentieth century, installing bathrooms, electricity and lifts. They also began the tradition of Garden Parties being held at the Palace.
The Queen has ruled for longer than any other Monarch in British history, becoming a much loved and respected figure across the globe. Her extraordinary reign has seen her travel more widely than any other monarch, undertaking many historic overseas visits. Known for her sense of duty and her devotion to a life of service, she has been an important figurehead for the UK and the Commonwealth during times of enormous social change.

Her Majesty continues to carry out a full programme of engagements, from visits to charities and schools, to hosting visiting Heads of State, to leading the nation in Remembrance and celebratory events - all supported by other members of the Royal Family.

The Queen sees public and voluntary service as one of the most important elements of her work. The Queen has links - as Royal Patron or President - with over 600 charities, military associations, professional bodies and public service organisations. These vary from well-established international charities to smaller bodies working in a specialist area or on a local basis only.
Over 1400 parading soldiers, 200 horses and 400 musicians come together each June in a great display of military precision, horsemanship and fanfare to mark The Queen's official birthday.

The streets are lined with crowds waving flags as the parade moves from Buckingham Palace and down The Mall to Horse Guard's Parade, alongside Members of the Royal Family on horseback and in carriages.

The display closes with an RAF fly-past, watched by Members of the Royal Family from Buckingham Palace balcony.

Once The Queen has arrived at Horse Guard's Parade in Whitehall, she is greeted by a Royal salute and carries out an inspection of the troops, who are fully trained and operational soldiers wearing the ceremonial uniform of red tunics and bearskin hats.

The Queen used to attend on horseback herself, but in recent years has travelled by carriage.

After the military bands have performed, the escorted Regimental Colour, or flag, is processed down the ranks of soldiers. Over one hundred words of command are used by the Officer in Command of the Parade to direct the several hundred soldiers.

Once the Foot Guards have marched past The Queen, she rides back to Buckingham Palace at the head of the soldiers, before taking the salute again at the Palace from a dais.

Her Majesty is then joined by other Members of the Royal Family on the balcony at Buckingham Palace to watch a fly-past by the Royal Air Force. A 41-gun salute is also fired in Green Park to mark the occasion.
In the week of Remembrance, The Queen, and Members of the Royal Family, join the nation in commemorating and honouring the men and women who have sacrificed themselves in Service to our country.

On the second Sunday of each November, The Queen and Members of the Royal Family remember those who have died in world wars and other conflicts. In a ceremony at the Cenotaph, the focal point of the nation's homage, Members of the Royal Family unite with others in thousands of similar ceremonies across the UK and worldwide in holding two minutes' of silence at 11am. In the run up to Remembrance Day members of the Royal Family attend a series of engagements to honour the fallen.

Thursday 8th November

The Duke of Sussex will visit the Field of Remembrance at Westminster Abbey on Thursday 8th November 2018.

Saturday 10th November

The Queen and Members of The Royal Family will attend the annual Royal Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall.

The Festival will be attended by The Queen, The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall, The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, The Duke and Duchess of Sussex, The Duke of York, The Earl and Countess of Wessex, The Princess Royal and Vice Admiral Sir Tim Laurence, The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester, The Duke of Kent and Prince and Princess Michael of Kent.

Sunday 11th November

The Queen and Members of the Royal Family will attend the annual Remembrance Day Service at The Cenotaph on Remembrance Sunday.

The Queen will view the Service from the balcony of the Foreign & Commonwealth Office building. A wreath will be laid on The Queen’s behalf by The Prince of Wales. An Equerry will lay a wreath on behalf of The Duke of Edinburgh.

The Service at the Cenotaph will also be attended by The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall, The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, The Duke and Duchess of Sussex, The Duke of York, The Earl and Countess of Wessex, The Princess Royal, The Duke of Kent and Prince Michael of Kent.

Following the Service The Princess Royal will take the Salute at the March Past of Veteran Organisations on Horse Guards Parade.

The Prince of Wales, Colonel of the Welsh Guards, will attend a Service at the Guard’s Chapel and lay a wreath at the Guards’ Memorial for the Welsh Guards’ Regimental Remembrance Sunday.

The Duke of York will go on to a Commemorative Service marking the Centenary of the Armistice of the First World War at St Anne’s Cathedral, Belfast. The Earl and Countess of Wessex will attend the Welsh National Service of Thanksgiving at Llandaff Cathedral, Cardiff. The Princess Royal will attend the Scottish Commemorative Service for the Centenary of the First Armistice in Glasgow Cathedral. The Duke and Duchess Gloucester will attend The National Memorial Arboretum Armistice Day service in Staffordshire.

That evening, Her Majesty The Queen, The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall, The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, The Duke and Duchess of Sussex, The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester, The Duke of Kent and Prince Michael of Kent will attend a Service to mark the Centenary of the Armistice at Westminster Abbey.

Armistice Day 2018 marks 100 years since the Armistice was signed, end the First World War and so Remembrance 2018 is a particularly important and poignant year, with a number of extra commemorative events.

